All right.
One of the most important lectures, asynchronous I o non-blocking reads and writes.
Okay, guys talk about here.
We will talk about people talk about all this beautiful things that we have most iOS in the kernel is
blocking.
What does that mean?
It means that read, write and accepts and multiple other syscalls are actually blocking.
That means that the moment you send it, you cannot move your program counter.
You're stuck.
And most probably you're going to be context switched out from your beautiful core if you make any of
these calls, because it's a blocking and you cannot do anything about it, we have to wait.
You have to block.
You cannot move to the next line of code.
You're technically synchronously blocked.
Right there.
There's a beautiful line of code.
I want to execute it.
Nope.
You made it.
You made an IO.
It's a block in IO.
You ain't moving.
And I'm not talking about async await.
And I know this this this is actual blocking, right?
So that's the process making call to a kernel.
And then it's blocked.
So the read blocks example a read.
Posix read will block when there is no data in the received buffer.
And except will blocks when you have no connections.
And if you, uh, if you read and there's a file you don't really technically block because the file,
unless maybe it's locked by something, it will be available if it's available, if you're reading a
file from this, you're essentially be blocked.
But blocked in a sense, because it reading from file is so slow that it will also consider be a blocked
operation.
But there is a finite block amount here.
Blocking from a receive buffer reading from a receive buffer in kernel network speak will.
Uh, block you as long as there is no data.
When the moment you have data, you'll be on lock and the data will be moved to your data.
And of course, it leads to context switches and slows down.
As an example, I did let me disappear.
So here's here's an example here.
Let's let's do some legend explaining here.
This is for first of all this is just pseudocode.
That's not real.
I just want to first of all to write the code here one first fit into a slide.
Second, uh it will.
There's so much stuff and it's really hard to pause and read.
So read is takes the connection.
I'm I'm building a loop to loop through all the connection and reading and putting it in a buffer.
That's all what I'm doing, right?
So this is a system call.
And here the legend.
These are packets or content or data in the receive queue for that connection.
So green is there is data.
Gray means there is no data and the receive queue.
So we have ten connections in my for that particular socket I'm reading from.
Right.
And I am a single processor responsible for reading from all those file descriptors.
So what have happened?
I'm going to read.
I'm going to read correction one successful immediately non non blocking because there is data read
connection to non-blocking.
But read connection three.
I'm blocked.
And let's say client three is just sleeping and never send any data.
I'll be blocked forever.
Well, until the client three send something.
But there is connection.
Four on five and six and seven.
What happened to those?
Well, I'm sorry, I cannot do.
I cannot go to the next program counter.
I cannot increment my program counter.
I'm stuck.
That's how a blocking operation is.
You cannot continue the loop, right?
Look at that.
That's really bad, right?
You don't want that.
You don't want any book.
You want to be able to at least know that.
Oh, there's data.
Read it.
Else move at least something like that.
Right.
And that's what async gives you.
So that's bad.
We don't we know this is bad.
We don't want to do it.
So meet asynchronous I o so read blocks when there is no data in the received buffer.
We talked about that.
And except blocks when there is no accept connection the queue.
So there there are certain ways to solve this.
And I'm going to talk about two ways here.
And none of them work with the storage approach.
Right.
Well, at least this doesn't work with ready approach.
Doesn't work with the storage, the completion.
Uh, maybe.
Yes, we'll talk about that.
The ready approach.
You do this, you ask the OS to tell us if a file descriptor is ready.
And by ready, that's ready.
That's not ready, that's ready.
That's not ready.
Right.
That's the readiness concept.
Okay.
So when it's ready, we call it without blocking.
And this is how cakewalk in Mac and how Apple works and select works in Linux.
And Ole, Ole, Ole will go through them.
Don't worry.
Yeah, we'll do that.
So that's the approach.
You ask if it's ready.
If it's ready, you read.
You don't perform the system call, you only perform it when you get a notification from, not notification
when you when you the when the kernel tells you it's ready, right.
So there is still a system called technically that is checks.
Is it ready?
Is it ready.
Right.
But we're going to make it better.
But still there is this is a really is a really is a really thing.
Completion approach is you ask the OS to actually do the work for you and notify you when it's completed.
So you submit a job, the kernel does the job and it writes back the result.
You don't do anything, you just moves on.
And that's how, uh, windows work.
I o completionist port and that's how I o during work, basically.
Uh.
You send a submit queue and there is a completion queue.
Right?
And as, as we talked about it, this doesn't work with storage stuff like because a file doesn't become
ready.
Right.
It's ready.
It's always ready.
It just takes time.
This epoll doesn't work with files, right?
You need a completion approach to to work with files essentially.
All right.
Let's talk about select, which is the first design that they built to solve this problem.
So select takes a collection of file descriptors for the kernel.
So the select takes a collection of file descriptors for the kernel to monitor says all right hey kernel.
I'm interested in these ten connections.
Monitor them please.
Right.
Monitor them if they are ready or not, then what happens here is you call select and you give it a
timeout.
All right.
Call select and I will be hey I want I'm interested in in these I want to it's actually to be honest
there is a read file descriptors.
I'm interested to read those.
I'm interested to write those.
I'm interested to accept those, write, uh, certain things from it.
Right.
So there's like a specific thing.
But I'm going to simplify and say, all right, I'm interested in these file descriptors and tell me
if they are ready or not.
So if there is at least one that is ready, the kernel will return.
And said, all right.
So you still need to call this select thing with the with the with the with the list or the set of file
descriptors every time you call it.
And if there is one thing that is ready, you're going to get back.
You'll immediately return, right?
Then the process actually need to check like which one is ready?
That is.
A loop and you need to call this thing called FD is set like you go, is it ready?
Is this one ready?
Is this one ready.
So you can see that this breaks up really like okay, first of all you want to call and I have ten connections.
And let's say one of them is ready.
Nine is not.
Then you have to loop which is big O of N to find out which one is the one that is ready.
It doesn't tell you.
The kernel doesn't tell you which one is ready.
Remember, this is the first one.
This is the first attempt to asyncronous.
Uh uh, I o.
So we have to loop to find out which one is ready, and you have to call it a set and it will tell you,
oh, is this one is set and this one is actually return, right.
Um, if D and it will actually return the if D set in whatever.
Like because you have to pass in a set.
And I will say it.
Is this one ready?
Is this one ready in this?
So plus it's called.
Then after you find out which one is ready, you call ready read, write, accept with a file descriptor.
So let's go through an example again.
Pseudo code.
Right.
You pass in select and you pass in the array of connections which are an array of file systems.
Sorry file descriptors.
And let's say this is the only one that is ready.
None of them are ready.
But what.
Guess what?
You don't know if you're here once this unblocked.
If by the way, if none of them are ready, you'll be blocked for whatever the timeout is specified.
If you don't have no timeout, you'll be blocked forever until one of them becomes ready.
Once any of them is ready, now you're responsible to do the loop on them.
You're looping through each one of them and calling FD is set.
It's like, is it ready?
If it's ready?
And this is fast, right?
Because you actually got back this if the set to actually loop through them and then you call read and
this will be unblocked.
So now technically you will loop pop fast fast fast skip skip skip skip skip skip skip skip skip.
You're skipping through here.
And then you get to this and you're going to read it.
And you you'll empty it as a drain it and then move on.
So let's select very simple but it has a certain disadvantages.
Pros and cons.
So what is what is the pros.
The pros is it avoids read reading unread resources as essentially you don't you're not blocked right.
Well technically you are blocked.
If you call select and there is no nothing ready.
But that's like a mini block, right.
Because there is a timeout.
And the process of that's basically what how asyncronous works, right?
I'm asyncronous now slightly better, but the code is like a little bit, uh, complex now and I'm doing
all this stuff, but it's still slow because I'm looping through all of them to do this if set thing.
Right.
Can you make it?
Can you make it so that the kernel tells me exactly what it's ready?
Yeah.
And another thing is we're copying a lot of stuff from userspace to kernel space, because every time
you pass in this stuff, you're copying all of this metadata to the kernel.
That's an array of set.
You're copying it to the kernel and moving it back, copying it back, copying it.
So there is like a lot of chattiness.
So it's very inefficient and it only supports a fixed number of files.
I think there's 255.
It doesn't support more because of the just the the way the kernel builds.
All right.
Let's do something better.
Epoll is the standard now.
Epoll is basically.
What people standardized on, on the Linux stuff for asynchronous operation.
Right.
And that's what node uses.
The through the library.
That's called libuv.
Uh, or live micro v.
I think that's how you read it, right?
For asynchronous operation, but it still has some limitations.
We'll talk about that.
So our people.
So here's how it works.
Epoll works by saying hey I'm interested.
You register an interest list once you do this once.
Register an interest list.
You do this once.
You register an interest list okay I'm interested in connection one, connection two, and connection
three.
That's the first thing you do right.
And the kernel starts creating this data structure.
It's called epoll create.
That's the system you call.
You call it it's fast.
It's one thing.
You do it and that's it.
There's a data structure that keeps creating here and it will start monitoring now.
Any packets arriving for connection three, connection two and connection three.
Which which is incoming.
Right.
Kernel keeps getting data for all this connection.
It will start marking those updating those data structures.
Oh we got we got data here.
We got data here.
We got data.
We'll start building something called events for the data structure as it arrives.
Because this is happening regardless.
Right.
So as this if this happens it will add entries to your data structure that you are in the interested
list.
Right.
And some of the interest list, some of the items interest will be empty.
Some of them will have events as in something just got in.
Right.
So so that's the thing that's happening on the background.
So then the process calls something called Epoll wait, which is similar to the select thing.
So.
Right.
Cool.
Epoll wait.
That's the third thing that happens.
And what that what that does is an immediate return by the kernel.
So it's still copying stuff, but will only copying things that are ready.
So all right, let's loop through all of this.
The interest list.
Oh we have this ready this ready this ready.
Let's create a data structure special and then return the list of events and happen.
In this case only one item in the interest list had it, which is connection three and has some data.
Boom.
Return an array of ready list.
All right.
Let's talk.
Let's go through an example.
So here is the E pole e in this particular case the colonel here's my ten connections.
And I create an E pole.
And I pass in all these beautiful connections.
Boom.
All these connections.
You get a beautiful E here.
That's your E pull.
Structure.
Then you call Ipal control.
Right.
Here.
That's another option here.
So you created you can pass the connection if you want, but what if you want to later add more connections.
You can add more connections or more uh, or remove for example, you can do it through this epoll control
and you can add more.
So I just added it to show you that you can actually add.
Right?
You're not stuck just by the creation you created once.
Remember the epoll creates ones and this can be changed as you have more connections to be interested
in.
Meanwhile the kernel is receiving and receiving data receiving receiving.
And so this is an infinite loop you call Epoll with, right?
Uh, we'll go through that next.
Next.
Meanwhile, receiving data.
What did we receive?
Well, we received some data on connection for some data on connection nine.
Look what happened.
The kernel only creates a new entry.
All right.
We have already list for connection.
For connection nine.
That's it.
So literally a pointer and it creates an entry.
Sweet.
That's beautiful.
Then the kernel, the process called epoll.
Wait, that's the system.
That's another syscall.
So we have one syscall, another syscall another syscall.
So we still talking to the kernel.
There's still chattiness.
There's still switching from kernel mode to user mode right.
And that's all right.
Give me the events.
What do I have?
And immediately here we have.
We know that there are two items.
Boom.
We loop, we empty that list, and we loop just on those two items, just on those two events, which
just happens to be connection four and connection nine.
Right.
So that's powerful.
People love this because hey, Big-O of it's not big o of N I don't loop through everything.
Right.
There is no big open.
This is really efficient, right?
The inefficient part is the constant syscalls.
We're still calling u8 e.
Wait wait wait wait.
Right.
So there is drawbacks to this, of course.
And there is.
It's really complex.
And I showed you part of the code.
The code is like a little bit more complex to write, right?
Uh, so there is like this thing that's called level triggered and then edge triggered.
No.
And and honestly, I keep forgetting the difference between the two.
I think there is like a level triggered and edge trigger.
Yeah.
If I remember correctly.
Level trigger.
Like.
Will only will bother you every time.
Let's say you have a connection that keeps receiving data.
So that means you're going to always get an event from that right connection, which is kind of unnecessarily
right.
So.
Uh, there is an overhead to that.
Right.
Because.
Okay.
Oh, connection three is always ready.
Right.
So you you're you're consuming an event entry for it and you're, uh, iterating over it.
So, uh, edge triggered on the other hand, and the kernel is also maintaining the data structure behind
it.
Right.
It's like always, always updating it.
So edge triggered is only tracks changes.
Like if the data is if there's always data I'm going to notify you once.
Right.
And then I'm not going to notify you again.
Unless something changed.
Unless it becomes not ready.
Then I'm going to notify you.
Right?
So that is.
Uh.
More efficient to the kernel, but it adds complexity to the user because the user has to track.
Oh, what was this now?
Was it now or was it ready or not?
You have to keep all of this stuff.
So level tracking is way easier of course, but edge tracker is more efficient.
But you the the client has to be know all of this.
And of course this is only available on Linux.
It's not that on windows.
And the disadvantage drawbacks is um this system calls.
Yeah.
Too many system calls.
System calls are expensive.
So many system calls means you're switching constantly from kernel mode to to user mode.
And we talked about how that causes.
Actually we're going to talk about that more.
But essentially it causes like we're flushing some registers and we're freeing up some registers for
the kernel mode for security reasons.
So yeah, there is a little bit of an extra overhead when you do a kernel switch mode to do the system
call.
And, uh, doesn't work on files because there's no concept of readiness.
Because this is, again, ready, right?
Because, hey, I received a connection.
I received the data, I became ready, it was not ready.
Now it's ready.
Right?
Uh, but files are always ready.
It was like this.
You cannot do asynchronous I o based on a ready based on files because they're they're just read them.
It just takes time.
All right.
Let's talk about I o ring.
So.
I o ring is the example I picked took uh for completionist based.
The kernel does the job here.
The and it's based on shared memory user and kernel shares space.
And that's basically where the biggest disadvantage of this is because of the shared memory.
And biggest advantage because of shared memory.
There is zero copy right?
I don't need to copy things around kernel and user share one area and they are literally reading from
the same thing.
So there is no much system calls going on.
That's a good thing.
But the bad thing is security, right?
We'll come to that.
They removed the overhead of kernel mode by adding shared memory.
Right.
We'll talk about how how this happens.
Kernel does the work and write the results.
How does disappear for a second?
Can I actually because I want you to see my hand waving.
Um, yeah.
So.
Let's talk through this.
Here is how it works.
We have the process.
And we have the Colonel.
On bottom, and then we have the user at the top.
Well, technically and they share memory.
There is a shared area.
There is allocated by area where user can write and a kernel can write and read from the same memory
accessible by both.
And you do certain.
Methods to write to, and in this shared memory there is two queues.
There is the submission queue and there is the completion queue.
So you submit any job you want, a read for a file, a write to a file and accept anything.
Just specify what you want in the submit queue.
So a process writes a job to the submission queue tail.
It goes to the end and the kernel reads it from the head.
The Colonel will pull a job, executes it when it's ready and when it feels ready.
And then when it's done, the colonel writes the completed job to the tail, and the process keeps consuming
the jobs that are completed.
From the head.
Very simple design, elegant.
And each job is assigned.
I call it job, but I don't know if it's.
That's what it is.
Each job is assigned and a unique identifier so that you can know that.
Oh, this is the job I actually submitted.
So you know which one is which.
Right.
That's basically it.
So you go here, go up the way here, here and here.
Right.
So right is just a copy.
You're copying directly to memory here.
And that's it.
And this is just a read and you're not really copying it again somewhere else.
Well maybe the kernel decides to copy this just temporarily somewhere to start execution, but it can
actually read this stuff.
So yeah, it is fast, it's non-blocking, but there's a huge security issue when it comes to shared
memory.
And people found all sorts of stuff.
Google limiting IO youring due to security vulnerabilities.
This was a June 2023.
While IO running has been one of the greatest Linux kernel innovation in recent years for helping to
deliver more performant and efficient IO, it also been home to various security vulnerabilities due
to ongoing security issues.
This interface for asynchronous IO is being restricted for outright disable or outright disabled across
Google products.
The Google Security blog noted that 60% of submission of the Google vulnerability rewards have been
around I o ring.
Google has paid out $1 million worth of I o youring vulnerabilities from its reward program.
Look at that.
All of this for I o units so they spend a lot of money for it.
So do you know what?
Let's disable this thing.
But this could be a good thing.
To be honest, right.
If we're flushing all the bugs, but eventually it's going to become secure.
But yeah.
So this is like all the how much if the FS library the net library and then I.
Oh and look at that total reward number of exploits.
So many 15 exploits as a total of $1 million.
As a result, 1 million is nothing for Google.
Come on Google.
As a result, Google has disabled IO in Chrome OS until finding a means to probably sandbox it.
Google Android, meanwhile, is using.
Uh seccomp.
BPF filter so that apps cannot use it while future Android.
So what is the security block set?
Well, I want to bring performance benefit and promptly react a secure and promptly react to security
issues with comprehensive security fixes like Backporting five 115 to 510 stable tree.
It is fairly new part of the kernel.
As such, IOU rank continues to be actively developed, but it still affected by severe vulnerabilities.
For those reasons, we currently disable it's disabled for now.
Maybe you're watching this course, you're listening to this course in 2025 or 6, and this is all enabled.
And this is the default.
Who knows.
All right.
Cross-platform.
How do I be close platform.
Like in windows they use event ports which is I sorry.
In windows they use ICMP and Apple Linux and Kqueue and whatever and Mac.
So how do we deal with that.
So no one just decided, you know, there is this library out there that's beautiful.
It's called Libuv and does take care of all the asynchronous I o for you.
We want to read it from the network.
If you're on windows I'll just abstract all this away from you.
If it's from Linux, I'm going to use Epoll.
If I'm in Mac, I'm going to use Kqueue.
Right.
Which is another uh, ready event.
If I'm in, I'm going to use event ports.
I don't know what event ports is.
Maybe it's be BSD, I think, uh, I o c am I if you're windows, are you going to use iocp, which
is a completionist just like I o you think not just like it.
Very similar, right?
If you want to read it from file, don't worry.
I have a way to always make it asynchronous and non-blocking.
I'll spin up a new thread and I'll give you a file read operation on that thread so your main thread
will become unblocked.
DNS I'll do it also in another thread.
User code, certain user code like crypto and stuff like that cryptographic operation.
I'll do it in a thread pool.
So there is a thread pool.
That's the when people say my node is multithreaded, they mean this.
That's what they mean, right?
Right.
Of course, you can spin up a thread if you want a node, but by default notice a single thread.
Unless you're doing any of these three operations, then it's going to use a thread pool in certain
situation.
Summary.
So some kernel syscalls are blocking.
We need to be asynchronous in certain cases.
This puts the process to sleep.
That's not nice.
We need to be asynchronous.
In certain cases.
There is a radio based.
There is a completion based.
Maybe you, the listener or the watcher, the student.
Maybe you will invent your own new approach.
That will.
You.
Maybe you will think outside the box and you will not think in terms of synchronous and asynchronous.
You'll you write your own operating system to avoid all of this stuff.
Keep it open.
See you in the next one.